=======
Mappers
=======

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   fields
   mapper

As the name suggests, a `Mapper` will map properties on themselves to your
object. They allow you to easily write proxy objects, primarily for converting
between serialised (JSON) and live (Python) formats of your resources.

.. Warning::
    Since a Mapper instance retains a reference to the object they are bound
    to, even when using << syntax, instances MUST NOT be shared between
    threads.

field decorator: get/set
========================

`Mappers` work using Python's descriptor protocol, which is most commonly used
via the ``property`` built-in. This gives you full control over a Mapper's
properties. When constructing a Mapper you can pass an object for it to "bind"
to. All attribute access to the Mapper fields will proxy to this bound object.

Here's an example to illustrate some of these concepts. Given the class `Person`:

.. code-block:: python

    # An object we want to create a Mapper for
    class Person:

        def __init__(self, first_name, last_name, is_alive):
            self.first_name = first_name
            self.last_name = last_name
            self.is_alive = is_alive


We might define a `Mapper` as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    from nap import mapper

    # A Mapper that we are creating for the Person object
    class PersonMapper(mapper.Mapper):
        '''
        The self argument refers to the object we bind the Mapper to when we
        construct it. It DOES NOT refer to the instance of the PersonMapper.
        '''
        @mapper.field
        def name(self):
            return '{}'.format(self.first_name, self.last_name)

        # We can use the Field class for simpler cases
        first_name = mapper.Field('first_name')
        last_name = mapper.Field('last_name')
        is_alive = mapper.Field('is_alive')

From this, we can now bind a `Mapper` instance to a `Person` instance, and
extract its data:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> person = Person('Jane', 'Doe', 22, True)
    >>> mapper = PersonMapper(person)

See :doc:`fields` for more details.

Mapper methods
==============

A Mapper supports several methods:

``_reduce()`` will reduce the instance to its serialisable state, returning a
dict representation of the `Mapper`.

``_patch(data)`` will partially update (patch) a `Mapper`'s fields with the
values you pass in the data dict. If validation fails it will raise a
`ValidationError`.

``_apply(data)`` will fully update (put) a `Mapper`'s fields with the values
you pass in the data dict. If you don't pass a field in the data dict it will
try to set the field to the default value. If there is no default and the field
is required it will raise a `ValidationError`.

``_clean(data, full=True)`` is a hook for final pass validation. It allows you
to define your own custom cleaning code. You should update the ``self._errors``
dict. The ``full`` boolean indicates if the calling method was ``_apply``
(True) or ``_patch`` (False).

Here is some code to explain how these concepts work. We will continue to use
the Person class and PersonMapper class defined above.

Note that these methods only update the fields of the model instance. You will
need to call save() yourself to commit changes to the database.

Using _reduce:

.. code-block:: python

    p = Person('Jane', 'Doe', True)
    m = PersonMapper(p)
    reduced_p = m._reduce()
    print(reduced_p)

    # Output: {'first_name': 'Jane', 'last_name': 'Doe', 'is_alive': True}


Using _apply:

.. code-block:: python

    m = PersonMapper()
    m._apply({
        "first_name": "Jane",
        "last_name": "Doe",
        "is_alive": False
    })
    reduced = m.reduce()
    print(reduced)

    # Output: {'first_name': 'Jane', 'last_name': 'Doe', 'is_alive': False}


Using _patch:

.. code-block:: python

    p = Person('Jane', 'Doe', True)
    m = PersonMapper(p)
    m._patch({"last_name": "Notdoe"}) # This should patch last_name
    reduced = m.reduce()
    print(reduced)

    # Output: {'first_name': 'Jane', 'last_name': 'Notdoe', 'is_alive': True}

Using _clean:

.. code-block:: python

    class DeadPersonMapper(PersonMapper):
        def _clean(self):
            if self.is_alive:
                raise ValidationError("Only dead people accepted to the morgue.")

    m = DeadPersonMapper()
    m._apply({'last_name': 'Doe', 'first_name': 'John', 'is_alive': True})

    # ValidationError

Shortcuts
---------

As a convenience, Mappers support two shorthand syntaxes:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> data = mapper << obj

This will bind the mapper to the obj, and then call ``_reduce``.

.. code-block:: python

   >>> obj = data >> mapper

This will call ``_patch`` on the mapper, passing data, and returning the
updated object.

ModelMappers
============

A ``ModelMapper`` will automatically create a ``Mapper`` for a Django model. A
``ModelMapper`` behaves very similar to a Django ``ModelForm``, you control it
by setting some fields in an inner ``Meta`` class.

The fields that can be set are:

.. class:: Meta

   .. attribute:: model

      Default: None

      The model this ``Mapper`` is for

   .. attribute:: fields

      Default: []

      The list of fields to use. You can set it to '__all__' to map all
      fields.

   .. attribute:: exclude

      Default: []

      The list of fields to exclude from the Model

   .. attribute:: required

      Default: {}

      A map to override required values for fields auto-created from the
      Model.

   .. attribute:: readonly

      Default: []

      The list of fields which are read only.

      Must not conflict with `required`.

You can rewrite the Mapper so that it subclasses ModelMapper. Here's a new
Person object that subclasses Django's models.Model:

.. code-block:: python

    from django.db import models


    # An Django models.Model we want to create a Mapper for
    class Person(models.Model):
        first_name = models.CharField(max_length=100)
        last_name = models.CharField(max_length=100)
        is_alive = models.BooleanField(default=True)

Here is the PersonMapper rewritten to use a ModelMapper:

.. code-block:: python

    from nap import mapper

    # This should reference the model package where we define Person
    from . import models


    class PersonMapper(mapper.ModelMapper):
        class Meta:
            model = models.Person
            fields = '__all__'

You can still use `field` to get/set properties and fields on a ModelMapper.
This is useful when the model contains some properties that the ModelMapper
cannot understand, or when you want to customise how certain fields are
represented.

To illustrate this we will add a new Django field (models.UUIDField) to our
model. UUIDField does not have a filter built in to nap, so you will need to
define your own get and set functionality using the `field` decorator.

Here is a Person model object with a UUIDField:

.. code-block:: python

    from django.db import models


    # An Django models.Model we want to create a Mapper for
    class Person(models.Model):
        first_name = models.CharField(max_length=100)
        last_name = models.CharField(max_length=100)
        is_alive = models.BooleanField(default=True)
        uuid = models.UUIDField(default=uuid.uuid4, editable=False)

And here is a complete ModelMapper that will correctly handle this new type of
field:

.. code-block:: python

    from nap import mapper

    from . import models


    class PersonMapper(mapper.ModelMapper):
        class Meta:
            model = models.Person
            fields = '__all__'

        @mapper.field(readonly=True)
        def uuid(self):
            return str(self.uuid) # Remember: self refers to the bound object.
